The female Player Character option for Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. If not chosen at the start of the game, she will appear as Professor Rowan's assistant instead.

In Pokémon Masters, Dawn appears as the protagonist of Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, hailing from Twinleaf Town in Sinnoh and being Childhood Friends with Barry. While her original Turtwig sync-pair was initially released in May 2020, she got a new Alcremie sync-pair when she co-starred with Serena during the "Palentines" event of February 2021 and a sygna-suit sync-pair with Olympus Mon Cresselia in February 2022.

Dawn co-starred in Pokémon the Series: Diamond and Pearl, where she aspired to be a top coordinator like her mother Johanna, but experienced a few bumps in the road. Her catchphrase may be "No need to worry", but that's probably when you should worry the most. She also corresponds to the wealthy Ice Queen Platinum in Pokémon Adventures and Mitsumi in Pokémon: Diamond and Pearl Adventure!.

Despite having the Version name Platinum in the manga, her pink motif in contrast to Lucas (or Ash's) blue, often associates her with Pearl Version.

    Adaptational Modesty: Dawn's skirt is about the same length as Leaf's, but because Dawn has greater presence in the franchise (she co-starred in the anime for years), more people have noticed and decided to do something about it. In Masters, her skirt is significantly lengthened such that it covers more of her thighs.
    
    Because Destiny Says So: In Pokémon Masters, Dawn may declare in random dialog that Pokémon and people are bound by invisible threads of destiny.
    Breakout Character: Dawn is one of the most iconic trainers in the Pokémon franchise, in no small part thanks to being the first female co-star in the anime (she got equal billing with Ash in Pokémon the Series: Diamond and Pearl and the first episode of the season is dedicated exclusively to her). 
    
    She was the still only Sinnoh player character to be recruitable when the second year of Masters was completed (Lucas wouldn't arrive until January 2022) and the Palentine's 2021 even gave her an alternate costume. The first Brilliant Diamond and Shining Pearl trailer opened with Dawn starting off on her journey and many news articles gave her top billing.
    
    Cheated Angle: Like Lucas, the full silhouette of Dawn's hat is properly only seen from a side angle, but in her running animation in the intro for Pokémon Platinum and in Pokémon the Series: Diamond and Pearl, she's depicted with the tail-end of her beanie sticking out to the side even from a full frontal view.
    
    Composite Character:
        In Masters, Dawn is in the role of the The Protagonist from Diamond & Pearl, having friends and family in Twinleaf Town and being Childhood Friends with Barry; at the same time she borrows characterization from the assistant version of herself—she appoints herself the Player Character's mentor and gripes about losing briefcases and pokédexesnote  in random dialog.
    Cool Big Sis: As the assistant, Dawn will take it on herself to walk you through several new mechanics as you make headway on your journey.
    
    Coordinated Clothes:
        In Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, Lucas and Dawn each wear a hat, a red scarf, a black vest over a white top, a bracelet, a yellow bag, and the rest of their outfit is comprised of Pink Girl, Blue Boy flourishes.
        
        In Pokémon Platinum, Lucas and Dawn adopt matching snow white scarves and Pink Girl, Blue Boy winter coats.
    Curtains Match the Window: Dawn has dark hair and dark grey eyes.
    
    Cutting Off the Branches: In Pokémon Masters, Dawn is the protagonist of the Sinnoh games, being Johanna's daughter and Childhood Friends with Barry, while Lucas is Professor Rowan's assistant.
        At the same time, however, Dawn, Lucas, and Barry have an arrangement of Starters that would only be possible in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl if Lucas were the protagonist—Dawn has Turtwig, Lucas has Chimchar, and Barry has Piplup.
        
    Ditzy Genius: In Masters, Dawn is a competent battler and coordinator... who also tends to be scatter-brained.
        In "A Day with Dawn" she gives the last of her canteen to a lost Lotad, and when her own Turtwig needs water, she offers it a drink from the canteen, too, only to remember she's already given all her water away.
        
        In a bit of random conversation dialog, Dawn will gripe about mornings, in which stuff always goes missing, like briefcases and pokédexes, and that one always ends up half past late before they know it.
        
        In another bit of random conversation dialog in her Palentines 2021 alt outfit, Dawn will admit that she sometimes forgets the oven when she's baking and will burn her work to a crisp.
    Exposed to the Elements: Dawn's tank top and microskirt suit her just fine despite the wintry Sinnoh weather—she'll even go trudging through waist-high snow. It's less blatant in Platinum, where Dawn has a new coat, but keeps exposed legs.
    
    Foil: Lucas and Dawn play the assistant differently in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. Dawn speaks with a more professional tone but has a stronger independent streak—in Pokémon Platinum, she thinks having one's own villa is much nicer than having to share a room with her sister and would be nice for romantic getaways.
    
    Hair Color Dissonance: There's confusion about Dawn's hair color between the games and adaptations. Sugimori drew it a navy blue (or black with blue hints) type color in her main artwork, but everything else has her with a lighter hue.
    Hero-Worshipper: In Masters, she is very giddy about looking like a hero in her Sygna Suit with Cresselia. In her "A Day With..." Story, it is mentioned how she liked looking up to heroes when she was younger, though she's embarrassed about it.
    
    Idol Singer: In Pokémon Masters, Dawn has the Contest Lover Tech attribute, which gives her team a Power-Up if she's teamed up with other coordinators like May, Lisia, or Wallace.
    Implied Death Threat: When the Player Character receives the Pokédex from the professor, the assistant expresses relief that the P.C. is kind to Pokémon. While Lucas stops himself before contemplating a scenario where the P.C. wasn't, Dawn goes so far as to imply she'd take drastic action against you.
    
    Lethal Chef: Downplayed. In Masters, she admits that she will forget about the oven while baking, thus completely burning the finished product, but this only happens on an occasional basis and the Poké Puff she gives to the player looks just as good as Serena's in spite her belief that she burnt it.
    
    The Mentor: As Professor Rowan's assistant in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, Dawn appoints herself mentor to the Player Character after he receives a pokédex. She does it again in Pokémon Masters, despite having been appointed to the protagonist role.
    Mistaken Identity: In Pokémon Masters, Irida mistakes her for Akari, her Hisuian counterpart.
    Palette Swap: In Pokémon Brilliant Diamond and Shining Pearl, Dawn has a selection of outfits that the player can give her if she's the Player Character.
    Pals with Jesus: In Pokémon Masters, Dawn's sygna-suit sync-pair includes Cresselia.
    
    Pink Girl, Blue Boy: Dawn is the pink girl to Lucas's blue boy.
        The Poké ball logo on her hat and her Pokétch have the same color as her pearl-pink miniskirt and boots.
        In Platinum, her new jacket is red, but it its big pink buttons and her new pink hairclips match her boots.
        Dawn's dress for super-contests is pink with white trim and comes with a pink ribbon for the back of Dawn's head.
    
    Pink Means Feminine: Her default outfits have copious amounts of pink, and she wears a pink dress for Pokémon Contests.
    Platonic Life-Partners: If Dawn is the player character, she's this with Barry, having grown up as childhood friends.
    
    The Pollyanna: Has very upbeat dialogue as an NPC despite having to combat Team Galactic on several occasions.
    Red/Green Contrast: Dawn's two-tailed Scarf of Asskicking is red in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl while Barry's is green.
    Rookie Male, Experienced Female: Dawn appoints herself The Mentor to the Player Character in both Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, where the P.C. is always male, and in Pokémon Masters, where a male P.C. is optional.
    
    Sailor Senshi Send-Up: Pokémon Masters made a big Shout-Out to Sailor Moon with Dawn's Sygna Suit—"A Day with Sygna Suit Dawn" even features Dawn making a speech In the Name of the Moon.
    The protector of dreams and the guardian of children's smiles! The shining moonlight led me to you! I'm Sygna Suit Dawn, the Knight of the Crescent Moon!
    
    Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Certain pieces of character art make Dawn the energetic girl to Lucas's savvy guy. Pokémon Diamond and Pearl's player selection screen shows Dawn smiling and Lucas not—in her character art for Pokémon Platinum, Dawn's pose is more upbeat and energetic than Lucas's.
    
    Ship Tease:
        In Pokémon Platinum, if Dawn is the assistant, she'll compliment the player character on their taste in villa furniture and may even relate romantic fantasies about spending time at the villa with a "special someone".
        In Masters, if Dawn is on a team with Lucas, she'll call it a Dream Team.
        In optional dialog for "A Special Day with Dawn" from the same game, she'll use Lucas as her example of people who shine when their energy is focused.
        
    Sibling Rivalry: In Platinum as an NPC, if she visits your villa, she'll tell you she's jealous — she has to share her room with her kid sister.
    Signature Headgear: As per usual for Pokémon protagonists. Dawn has a white beanie with a pink Poké Ball stenciled on the front.
    
    Strong Family Resemblance: Dawn is basically Johanna ten or twenty years younger, with long hair.
    Sweet Tooth: In Dawn's Palentines 2021 sync-pair with Alcremie, she has the Sweet Tooth Tech attribute, which gives her a Power-Up when on a team with others who like sweets, like Bruno, Grant, or Bea.
    
    Team Chef: Dawn's Palentines 2021 sync-pair also gives her the Cook Tech attribute, which gives her a Power-Up when on the team with other cooks like Siebold or Mallow.
    Teens Love Shopping: During an encounter with the Player Character in Veilstone City, Rowan's assistant will admit In-Universe to getting Sidetracked by the Gold Saucer—if Dawn is the assistant, she will admit to shopping at the Veilstone Department Store and immediately change the subject.
    
    Theme Naming: Both Player Character options have names themed around light. "Hikari" is the standard reading of 光, the Japanese kanji for "light", and while Dawn isn't directly named for light, she is named for the sunrise. The theme is even stronger in the remakes, Brilliant Diamond and Shining Pearl.
    
    Thinks Like a Romance Novel: In Platinum, some of Dawn's NPC chatter in the villa includes the fantasy of spending time in the villa with "that special someone".
    Tsundere: As an NPC. Type B: often sweet, but very mad when she gets angry.
    
    Tutu Fancy: Downplayed. Her red and white tutu, which she wears for Contest Spectaculars in the remakes, has a trailing ribbon on the sash, but it's otherwise fairly practical.
    Zettai Ryouiki: Dawn's standard outfit in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl hits the borderline between B- and C-grade, but her longer socks in Pokémon Platinum are definite B-grade.

Tropes specific to Dawn's Pokémon or strategy are listed here.

    Amazon Brigade: In the remakes Dawn's post-game teams are predominantly female when she's the assistant. The only Pokémon on her teams that aren't female are the starters and, unusually, Magmortar (presumably a subtle Mythology Gag to one being used by Lucas in the anime).
    
    Attack! Attack! Attack!: In BDSP, Dawn's final teams, regardless of starter, are geared almost entirely for offense.
    Cute Clumsy Girl: The Lopunny on Dawn's second Empoleon team invokes this trope as part of its strategy—it carries a Lagging Tail, which would normally doom it to lagging behind the opponent, but it also has the ability Klutz, which means it can't use or receive the effects of any items it carries. She also knows Switcheroo, allowing her to give the Lagging Tail to an enemy and rob them of their intended item.
    
    Dance Battler: Dawn's Bellossom knows both the hard-hitting Petal Dance and the stat-boosting Quiver Dance.
    Full Health Bonus: Dawn's Typholosion knows exactly one move, Eruption, which is at its most powerful when the user is at full health. In order to preempt a faster opponent from damaging Typhlosion in advance, Dawn has it wearing a Choice Scarf to give it Super-Speed.
    
    I Shall Taunt You: Dawn's Critical Hit Class Honchkrow uses Taunt to provoke a foe into attacking it and then uses Sucker Punch to punish them for attacking.
    Mighty Glacier: Dawn's Trash Cloak Wormadam has a moveset that presumes it will naturally be going after the foe. Gyro Ball does more damage depending on how much slower it is than the foe and Metal Burst returns the damage of any attack it takes by half again as much but needs the foe to go first.
    
    Mythology Gag:
        In Brilliant Diamond & Shining Pearl if the player chose Turtwig, her post-League team will be strikingly similar to her anime one, having Mamoswine, Togekiss, Typhlosion (evolved form of her anime counterpart's Quilava), Lopunny (her anime's Buneary evolved form) and Empoleon (her anime's Piplup final evolution stage); the only difference is that Pachirisu is swapped out for a Bellossom.
        
        Her team before that gives her Froslass, a Pokémon owned by her Pokémon Adventures counterpart, Platinum. Sadly, Rapidash couldn't join her since it's already associated with Barry.
        
    Olympus Mons: In Masters she partners up with Cresselia when wearing a Sygna Suit for the second half of the Team Galactic Arc.
    Our Fairies Are Different: In Masters she's paired with Alcremie for Palentine's 2021, making her the first player character Trainer to be paired with a Pokémon created after their debut generation.note 
    
    Signature Mon:
        Artwork pertaining to the games gives her either the Turtwig or Chimchar lines, including being paired with Turtwig in Masters.
        In more prominent adaptations (such as the anime, the Kotobukiya figures, and Adventures) she's had the Piplup line, though on one occasion had the Chimchar line.
        
    Spectacular Spinning: Dawn's Dance Battler Bellossom uses Petal Dance, which causes the user to spin so much that it inevitably gets dizzy and becomes confused after two or three turns. Bellossom also has a Persim Berry to undo its confusion and let it jump back into the action with another Petal Dance.
