In Pokémon Masters, Lucas takes the assistant role, arriving belatedly during the Sinnoh chapter of the Main Story's villain arc. When confronting Cyrus, the leader of Team Galactic, Lucas goes out of his way to prevent the villain from slaying Dialga, which inspires the Olympus Mon to form a sync-pair with the young boy; this sync-pair was first released in January 2022. A second sync-pair featuring Lucas and Flareon was released in November 2022.

His Alternate Selves include the fun-loving Diamond in Pokémon Adventures and the Wild Child Hareta in Pokémon: Diamond and Pearl Adventure! He also has a small cameo in the opening sequence of Pokémon: Giratina and the Sky Warrior.

    Absent-Minded Professor: During "A Day with Lucas" in Pokémon Masters, Lucas gets a lost in his thoughts while theorizing about sync stones until Dawn snaps him out of it. Given that Professor Rowan is also an Absent-Minded Professor in Pokémon Platinum, Lucas may have picked it up from him.
    Adaptational Badass: Lucas trains more powerful monsters in adaptations than anything he used as the assistant in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. During The Cameo he gets in the Giratina and the Sky Warrior, Lucas is seen commanding a Magmortar.
    
    Adaptation Dye-Job: During The Cameo he gets in Pokémon: Giratina and the Sky Warrior, Lucas has some blue hair-shading and his clothes have a light Palette Swap.
    Androcles' Lion: In Masters, Lucas steps in on Dialga's behalf when Cyrus tries to have it killed, despite his Pokémon being out of commission. This act motivates the legendary to turn against Cyrus in earnest and form a sync pair with Lucas.
    
    Big Brother Mentor: As the assistant, Lucas will take it on himself to walk you through several new mechanics as you make headway on your journey.
    Big "WHAT?!": Lucas drops one in Diamond and Pearl when he finds out you've used the professor's Pokémon from the briefcase.
    Breaking Old Trends: Lucas's Pokémon Platinum outfit finally killed off the ultra ball-based Player Character palette in favor of great ball colors.
    The Cameo: In the anime, he only appears briefly during the beginning of Pokémon: Giratina and the Sky Warrior, battling Brendan.
    
    Cheated Angle: Lucas is often depicted at an angle so that the full shape of his cap is visible, but where his running animation in the intro for Pokémon Diamond and Pearl and character model in Pokémon Brilliant Diamond and Shining Pearl depict the hat correctly from a head-on view, his running animation in the intro for Platinum and character model in Pokémon Masters have the hat pulled to the side to preserve its silhouette even when looking straight at him.
    
    Coordinated Clothes:
        In Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, Lucas and Dawn each wear a hat, a red scarf, a black vest over a white top, a bracelet, a yellow bag, and the rest of their outfit is comprised of Pink Girl, Blue Boy flourishes.
        
        In Pokémon Platinum, Lucas and Dawn adopt matching snow white scarves and Pink Girl, Blue Boy winter coats.
    Crazy Enough to Work: Not quite a plan so much as a theory—in Pokémon Masters, Lucas theorizes in character dialog that Pokémon develop new features like spikes when evolving because those are features they really wanted to have. As silly as it sounds, there are Pokémon who are known to fit that description exactly (e.g., Bagon are known for their desperate wish to fly and their ultimate evolution into the flight-capable Salamence).
    
    Cutting Off the Branches: Lucas appears as the protagonist of Pokémon Diamond in Pokémon Evolutions.
    Demoted to Extra: At the beginning of Generation IV, Lucas had a sizable amount of focus as the default player character, prominently shown in various game trailers with Dawn being the secondary player. 
    
    But as time went on, Dawn's growing popularity with fans pushed Lucas to the sidelines, culminating with Pokémon Masters officially designating him as Rowan's assistant rather than Johanna's son (in stark contrast to Brendan, who still remains as Norman's son despite May's anime popularity).
    
    Foil: Lucas and Dawn play the assistant differently in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl. Lucas speaks with a more casual tone but is more devoted to being Professor Rowan's assistant—he talks more about the Pokédex being the professor's work and in Pokémon Platinum thinks the villa would be convenient for research purposes.
    
    The Gambling Addict: During an encounter with the Player Character in Veilstone City, Rowan's assistant will admit In-Universe to getting Sidetracked by the Gold Saucer—if Lucas is the assistant, he'll confess to visiting the Game Corner and immediately change the subject.
    Hair Color Dissonance: There's confusion about Lucas's hair color between the games and adaptations. Sugimori drew it a navy blue (or black with blue hints) type color in his main artwork, but everything else has him with a lighter hue.
    
    Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Barry (if Lucas is the player character), having grown up as childhood friends.
    Indy Ploy: "A Day with Sygna Suit Dawn" from Pokémon Masters features Dawn, Lucas, and the Player Character investigating a Hostage Situation. When they find the Mooks responsible, Lucas quickly improvises a rescue, deciding We Need a Distraction and having Dawn play a Sailor Senshi Send-Up. Dawn gets mad at him afterwards for such an embarassing plan, only to be embarassed again once Lucas notes how well she played the part.
    
    Kid Sidekick: Of the two possible assistants, Lucas is more attached to the role.
        In Veilstone, losing the Pokédex will cause him to reveal he thinks he's useless without it; in Canalave he'll talk about filling "the" Pokédex as part of Professor Rowan's research (Dawn refers to it as hers); and in Platinum, if he visits the Player Character's villa, he'll talk about how convenient it would be for research purposes.
        Lucas is Rowan's assistant again in Pokémon Masters, where he conducts research and develops personal theories.
        
    Merging the Branches: In Masters Lucas uses Pokémon from both his Torterra-based and Infernape-based teams, which are mutually exclusive in Pokémon Brilliant Diamond and Shining Pearl.
        When first introduced in Pokémon Masters, cutscenes show that Lucas' starter Pokémon is Infernape—the last and natural choice after Dawn's Turtwig and Barry's Piplup. However, this arrangement isn't possible in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, where—as the unchosen Player Character—he ought to have the weaker type matchup with the player's starter. In other words, Masters treats Dawn as the protagonist of the original games, but distributes starter Pokémon as if Lucas were the protagonist.
        
        Despite his revealed starter of Infernape, Lucas's second sync-pair, released in November 2022, features him with Flareon, the Eeveelution from his final Torterra team in Pokémon Brilliant Diamond and Shining Pearl.
        In the "Training with Lucas" event from May 2023, Lucas uses Kabutops as the player's opponent, another Pokémon from his Infernape team.
        
        The "Lucas Mix Scout" event of January 2025 muddies the waters even further by giving him a Torterra, a second starter next to the Infernape he had originally.
    Mistaken Identity: In Pokémon Masters, Adaman mistakes him for Rei, his Hisuian counterpart.
    Nice Guy: As an NPC, he's very affable and polite.
    
    Out of Focus: Poor Lucas hasn't a fraction of Dawn's presence in the franchise. Even Barry gets more to do.
        Dawn co-starred in Pokémon the Series: Diamond and Pearl, and Barry became Ash's rival, but Lucas was Adapted Out—instead, Ash wore modified versions of his clothes. Lucas had only one appearance in his own right, as The Cameo in Giratina and the Sky Warrior.
        Pokémon Masters released Barry at launch in August 2019 with a prominent role in the early story, released Dawn within its first year and gave her Palette Swap to co-star in the Valentines 2021 event with Serena, and all but forgot Lucas until finally releasing him in January 2022.
        
    Palette Swap:
        In Pokémon Brilliant Diamond and Shining Pearl, Lucas has a selection of outfits that the player can give him if he's the Player Character.
        As of January 2025, Lucas has only one palette swap in Masters: the Dialga-based colors of his EX outfit from his original release in January 2022.
    Pals with Jesus: In Pokémon Masters, Lucas's initial sync-pair includes Dialga.
    Pink Girl, Blue Boy: Lucas is the blue boy to Dawn's pink girl.
    
        The Poké ball logo on his hat and his Pokétch share the same color as his diamond-blue pants.
        In Platinum, Lucas's new jacket is blue, too.
        Lucas's tuxedo for super-contests is mostly black, but he wears a blue vest underneath.
    Primary-Color Champion: Pokémon Platinum finally killed off the ultra-ball color scheme for Player Character clothes with Lucas's new outfit, throwing out the yellow and giving him some great-ball blue—this red, white, and blue palette would be passed on to future male protagonists.
    
    Red/Green Contrast: Lucas's one-tailed Scarf of Asskicking is red in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl while Barry's is green.
    Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Certain pieces of character art make Lucas the savvy guy to Dawn's energetic girl. Pokémon Diamond and Pearl's player selection screen shows Dawn smiling and Lucas not—in his character art for Pokémon Platinum, however, Lucas does smile, but his pose is much less energetic than Dawn's.
    
    Ship Tease: Diamond & Pearl includes a sequence where The Protagonist rescues the assistant from Commander Mars at Lake Verity, who accuses them of being a lovey-dovey couple; Pokémon Masters revisits this idea in "Intertwined Pasts" when Mars teases Lucas about being a couple with Dawn, despite his denials.
    Signature Headgear: As per usual for Pokémon protagonists. Lucas wears a red flat cap with a poké ball stenciled on the side.
    
    The Smart Guy:
        In Pokémon Masters, Lucas has the Knowledgeable Tech attribute, which gives his team a strong offensive advantage when other smart guys like Professors Sycamore or Kukui are on the team.
        The Theme Naming of his sync-moves in the same game also highlights his intellect, with Dialga's Illuminating Roar of Time and Flareon's Red-Hot Research Fire Beam.
    Strong Family Resemblance: Lucas's hair and eye color matches Johanna's, albeit not the same shade.
    Theme Naming: Both Player Character options have names themed around light. The "kou" in Kouki is an alternate reading of 光, the same character that forms the basis of Hikari's name, and "kouki" is the standard reading of 光輝, which means, "brightness; splendour". The name Lucas likely comes from the Greek leukós, which means "light, brightness". The theme is even stronger in the remakes, Brilliant Diamond and Shining Pearl.
    
    Took a Level in Badass: In Pokémon Masters, Rowan's assistant Lucas is more competent and has raised more powerful Pokémon than in Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, where the assistant Can't Catch Up and needs assistance from the Player Character regardless of sex.

Tropes specific to Lucas's Pokémon or strategy are listed here.

    Big Entrance: In Pokémon Masters, Lucas's sync partner Dialga has Grand Entry for its first ability, which gives it a massive Special Attack boost when it first enters battle.
    Dangerous Forbidden Technique: Lucas's Infernape knows Close Combat, which hits tremendously hard but causes the user to drop their defenses. This Infernape is given a white herb to negate that drop in defenses (and the use of Infernape's held item doubles the power of Acrobatics, another of Infernape's moves).
    Defiant to the End: Lucas's Empoleon had its hidden ability Defiant in version 1.0.0, which caused its attack to rise when any of its stats were lowered.
    
    Fantastic Foxes:
        In BDSP, each of Lucas's second post-game teams has an Eeveelution—Glaceon on his Empoleon team, Flareon on his Torterra team, or Espeon on his Infernape team.
        In Pokémon Masters, Lucas received a second sync-pair featuring Flareon for the Three Eevee Tales event, co-starring with both Kris and Jolteon and Lyra and Vaporeon.
    Fossil Revival: In BDSP, each of Lucas's second post-game teams has a Prehistoric Monster—Cradily, Rampardos, or Kabutops.
    Haunted Technology: In BDSP, each of Lucas's second post-game teams has a Rotom in one of its machine forms.
    
    Hour of Power: Some of Lucas's possible Pokémon employ a Deliberate Injury Gambit, inflicting themselves with Status Effects for power, but the Damage Over Time gives them a countdown.
        Flareon in general are natural Glass Cannons, but Lucas's has the hidden ability Guts to take its phenomenal physical offense even further and gives it a Toxic Orb to do it immediately. Unfortunately, this gives Flareon a small window of activity before it collapses from poison. 
        
        Flareon's moveset is geared to take as much advantage of its ability as it can, with Facade (which does triple damage due to the status effect and Guts in tandem), a ferocious same-type Flare Blitz, and Iron Tail for enemy rock-types.
        Downplayed with Lucas's Milotic, which holds a Flame Orb to burn itself automatically (which will activate Milotic's Marvel Scale ability), but Milotic can hold the Damage Over Time at bay with its Recovery.
        
    Olympus Mons:
        He (or his equivalent character) has captured Regigigas in no less than three different manga adaptations.
        In Masters, while all three Sinnoh starters are featured in sync-pairs with Dawn, Barry, and Flint, Lucas was paired up with Dialga.
    Regenerating Health: Lucas loves using healing mechanisms in his strategies. In addition to the Moonlight-wielding Clefable and Recovery-capable Milotic shared by both assistants, Lucas's Torterra, Gliscor, Cradily, Glaceon, Dunsparce, and Kabutops all having healing tactics of one kind or another.
    
    Revive Kills Zombie: Inverted. Lucas can use Pokémon whose abilities turn normally damaging effects into healing ones.
        Lucas' second Empoleon team in BDSP has a Gliscor carrying a Toxic Orb, which would normally doom it to being badly poisoned, but his Gliscor also has its hidden ability Poison Heal, which means it heals damage instead.
        
        The same team also has a Glaceon with its hidden ability Ice Body, which heals Damage Over Time while Hail is in effect.
    Scratch Damage: The Milotic that may be on Lucas's first team is geared to force its enemies into this position. It carries a Flame Orb to automatically burn itself and thereby activate its Marvel Scale to boost its Defense, and it carries Calm Mind to boost its Special Attack and Special Defense. Further, its one offensive move is Scald, which may burn the foe and thereby cripple its Attack. Milotic can then hide behind a Substitute and heal damage with Recovery.
    
    Signature Mon:
        Contemporary with Gen IV, three of his manga counterparts have been featured with the Turtwig line.
        A piece of Platinum official art gave Infernape to Dawn and Torterra to Barry, associating Lucas with Empoleon by comparison.
        Circa the era of the Nintendo Switch, Lucas has been associated with the Chimchar line (following Dawn's association with Piplup in merchandise). Kotobukiya merch, Pokémon Evolutions, the concept art for Brilliant Diamond and Shining Pearl, and Pokémon Mastersnote  all associate him with the Fire starter.
        
        Pokémon Masters has given him several monster sync-pairs, but cutscenes indicate his starter was an Infernape, however.
            Lucas's first sync pair is with Dialga. As of New Year's 2025, this is the only sync pair he has with an EX Palette Swap.
            Lucas's second sync pair is with Flareon.
            Lucas uses a Kabutops in the "Training with Lucas" event.
            The "Mix Scout Lucas" banner features a sync pair with, Infernape starter be damned, a Torterra.
            
    Weather of War:
        The Glaceon on Lucas's second Empoleon team knows Hail and is doubly-blessed by it; not only does Hail make Glaceon's Blizzard an Always Accurate Attack, Glaceon has its hidden ability Ice Body, which lets Glaceon heal Damage Over Time.
        One of Dialga's sync-grid abilities in Pokémon Masters is Sand Shelter, which protects it from sandstorm damage.
        In Pokémon Masters, Lucas's second sync-pair features Flareon, whose Solarize ability makes the weather sunny after using their sync move and whose Team Solar Immunity ability protects their allies from Status Effects during sunny weather.
