The Rival of Diamond, Pearl, and Platinum. Barry is an impatient and hyperactive young man who always seems to be in a rush. His dream is to become the Pokémon League Champion, and especially wants to achieve it as fast as possible. However, his genuine talent at raising Pokémon is offset by his haste and lack of patience, and his preference for brute force over strategy.

Outside of the Adventures manga where he's named Pearl, he's generally not associated with a particular Version.

    Always Someone Better: Thanks to Barry, you can only be the second person to beat most of the Trainers in Sinnoh. Even when you come to Snowpoint City, to help Barry out at Lake Acuity, you'll find that Barry took a quick detour to beat the local Gym Leader before you. On the other hand, the game's events repeatedly confirm the player to be the better Trainer, and the player ultimately beats the Sinnoh Pokémon League first. In Platinum, checking the statues at the gym's entrance confirms that he didn't beat Volkner before you did, and a conversation with Barry after the 8th badge is obtained indicates that you got to Sunyshore City before him.
    
    Attention Deficit... Ooh, Shiny!: After barging into your room in Platinum he stops himself in the middle of a sentence to comment on your new laptop. In a later scene, he gets distracted again by one of those cut-outs in which tourists take pictures in.
    
    Bash Brothers: Barry joins the Player Character at the Mt. Coronet peak during the final confrontation with Team Galactic, which is also an opportunity for him to settle the score with Galactic Commander Jupiter, who crushed him at Lake Acuity. In Platinum, you team up with him again against Flint and Volkner post-game in front of the Battle Tower.
    
    Big Damn Heroes: Just when it looks like you'll have to face Jupiter and Mars alone atop of Mt. Coronet, guess who shows up and heals you afterwards?
    Catchphrase:
        "What was that about?"
        And briefly, "I'm fining you [large amount of money] if you're late!" This is by far his most iconic line, however, to the point where it carries on to all the adaptations.
    Character Development: As the story goes on, he becomes more patient and less hasty and stops crashing into you all the time. He also becomes better at creating strategies and learning from his losses. This ends up getting reflected in his team of Pokémon. For instance, he ends up catching a Munchlax, the single rarest Honey Tree Pokémon. Anyone who's tried the same can tell you how significant that is.
    
    Childhood Friends: While they're not quite next-door neighbors like in Pokémon Red and Blue or Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire, the Player Character and Barry both grew up together in Twinleaf Town. Barry's so comfortable with the player character that he comes barging into your room to drag you out into the adventure.
    
    Color Contrast: Barry's design goes out of its way to zig where the player character designs zag.
        Dawn and Lucas have very dark if not simply black hair—Barry is blonde.
        Dawn and Lucas both wear red scarves—Barry's scarf is green.
        Dawn and Lucas inherit the Poké Ball-Ultra Ball color scheme from previous generations—Barry inherits the orange and green from Pokémon Emerald.
        Dawn and Lucas wear predominantly primary colors and have notable splashes of black for contrast—Barry wears predominantly secondary colors and his gray pants provide less contrast.
        Dawn and Lucas get brand new outfits in Platinum—Barry gets his original clothes with longer sleeves.
    Crash-Into Hello: Your rival's normal way of greeting you, accompanied by some enlarged text in the dialogue box. At one point, Palmer demonstrates that such clumsiness is a family trait. Lampshaded during one of your mid-game encounters with him, where he doesn't crash into you and gleefully points this out, asking if you were surprised.
    
    "Thud!!"
    Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: He is so dorky and impatient that it's easy to forget that his Platinum iteration was the strongest trainer to have appeared in the series prior to HeartGold and SoulSilver giving Red a boost.
    
    Dramatic Irony: After you get your fourth Gym Badge, Barry interrupts your pursuit of a Galactic Grunt with a mysterious package to challenge you to a battle. This Grunt ends up ensuring that Lake Valor explodes and Azelf is caught, though your ill-timed match with Barry only has you miss him by a hair.
    Dumb Blond: Downplayed; he's not that dumb, but he is impulsive and his earlier "tactics" boil down to 'get strong and win.'
    
    Family Business: In Masters it's revealed that the reason he's always charging fines is because he wants to build his own battle facility and be a Frontier Brain like his dad.
    Fanboy: In Platinum, he holds great respect for Crasher Wake and calls him his master, much to Wake's chagrin.
    Fighting Your Friend: Basically, what you do with him. It defines your relationship.
    Friendly Rivalry: With the player character.
    
    Generation Xerox: He looks and acts like his father, right down to the Crash-Into Hello.
    Graceful Loser: While he's always ready to brag about his wins, he takes his losses to the player well and always congratulates them on their team's strength.
    Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold: He's one of the main heroes and is blond.
    
    Heroic BSoD: The events at Lake Acuity send him into one due to failing to stop Team Galactic, and it takes the poor kid a while to snap out of it.
    Hot-Blooded:
        He's always eager to fight, as his Platinum animation shows.
        In Pokémon Masters, his sync-pair with Piplup gives him the Passionate Spirit Tech attribute, which gives him a Power-Up when he's teamed up with other hot-blooded characters like Flannery or Flint.
        
    Hypocritical Humor:
    Barry: If you're not a Pokémon, and you run like that, you're a bad guy.
    Irony:
        For such an impatient boy, he also acquires a Heracross and a Munchlax, both of which require waiting for hours after slathering honey on the honey trees.
        In Diamond & Pearl, he didn't think too much of Crasher Wake. In Platinum, Barry holds great admiration for him and likes to proclaim him as his master, despite Wake never agreeing to it.
    Keet: Especially at the very beginning. He learns to tone down his hyperactivity slightly by the end, though he's still extremely energetic.
    Loony Friends Improve Your Personality: Barry has a hyperactive personality and forcibly drags Dawn or Lucas into starting the journey.
    
    Meaningful Name:
        "Jun" is the standard reading of 純, a kanji that means "purity" or "innocence"—a suitable name for a character with such naive expectations about becoming a master immediately.
        One of the etymological origins of Barry is that it's a shortened form of the Gaelic name Fionnbharr, or "fair-hair", a natural fit for the blonde rival.
    My Greatest Failure: His devastating defeat at Lake Acuity prompts him to expand his worldview beyond winning and losing.
    Privileged Rival: While he first appears to be a normal kid from around town like the player character, the post-game reveals that he's in reality the son of Palmer, the Battle Tower's Tower Tycoon and, in Pokémon Platinum and Pokémon HeartGold and SoulSilver, likely the most well-known of the Frontier Brains.
    
    Riddle for the Ages: It's not entirely clear how Barry defeats some of Sinnoh's Gym Leaders with the teams he faces you with, particularly in Brilliant Diamond and Shining Pearl with the Gym Leaders' moveset updates. Barry's defeat of Volkner is the most mysterious, mainly because it evidently didn't restore Volkner's passion for battling.
    The Rival: He's this of the Gen IV Trainers.
    Scarf of Asskicking: He wears a scarf and you will battle him a few times.
    
    Schedule Fanatic: Among Barry's main Character Tics are not only that he times everything you do, but he threatens to fine you obscene amounts of money if you're late.
    Secondary-Color Nemesis: Downplayed. While not evil, he's the rival, and his orange and green color scheme clashes with Dawn and Lucas's, who are both Primary Color Champions.
    Secret Test of Character: In Platinum, he passes one from Professor Rowan to get his Pokémon. Rowan wonders out loud about giving Pokémon to kids reckless enough to go into tall grass without any Pokémon of their own... to which Barry accepts this outcome for himself but asks Rowan to still give a Pokémon to the player because running through the tall grass was his idea, not theirs. Rowan is impressed by Barry's responsibility and gives both kids Pokémon.
    
    Shared Family Quirks: It turns out his father, Palmer, is just as hasty and has a tendency to be late just like him.
    Signature Mon: Artwork and merchandise pertaining to the games, as well as one manga, give him the Turtwig line, and two of his other manga counterparts are given the Chimchar line. His appearances in the anime, Pokémon Evolutions, and in Masters see him use the Piplup line.
    
    Speed Demon: Barry has a hasty and impatient personality. He's always in a hurry, never walking but running to anywhere he needs to go. Everything has to be done fast or he'll threaten to give a fine for being late. He dreams of becoming a Pokémon League Champion, especially if it can be done in the shortest time possible.
    Strong Family Resemblance: Barry has his father's blonde Anime Hair, albeit curlier. They also have the Shared Family Quirk of running into people.
    Technicolor Eyes: They're orange, which is, incidentally, his signature color.
    
    Theme Naming: Barry gets in on it with Lucas and Dawn in the English localization in a small way, since his name derives from the Gaelic name Fionbharr, which means "fair-hair".
    This Loser Is You: Though not portrayed negatively. His way of banging into everything and everyone is a pretty obvious reference to how player characters tend to run or bike absolutely everywhere to speed things along, often running into things as a result. All those NPCs who mention how impatient he is? They might just say the same thing about you, except they're too polite to say it to your face.
    
    Took a Level in Badass: When Platinum was first released, the levels of Barry's team actually exceeded Red's before Red regained his title again in the Gold and Silver remakes.
