Professor Rowan / Dr. Nanakamado (ナナカマド博士 nanakamado hakase)

The Pokémon Professor native to the Sinnoh region who specializes in the study of Pokémon evolution.

    Badass Bookworm: Takes on a load of Galactic Grunts in order to stop them from overpowering Dawn/Lucas, much to their fury. With his bare hands!
    Badass Longcoat: To contrast with the previous professors, who all had labcoats, Rowan wears a longcoat and is willing to take on Galactic Grunts with his bare hands.
    Badass Normal: When he fights a load of Galactic Grunts, he does it with his bare hands.
    
    Contrasting Sequel Main Character:
        Unlike Professor Oak, Professor Elm and Professor Birch who are absent-minded Pokémon Professors preferring to stay out of conflict, Professor Rowan, while still sharing the same Absent-Minded Professor trait the other three hasnote , is more inquisitive and won't hesitate to take literal punches, as shown when he's able to take on Galactic Grunts in Jubilife City to protect both the player and his assistant.
        Also, unlike the previous three professors before him who wear white labcoats, Rowan wears a brown longcoat around his clothing. Rowan also dresses more formally, in contrast to the previous three who dress casually.
        
        As shown in the future game X and Y, he's the very first Professor to have explicitly mentored another Pokémon Professor in the past, that being Professor Sycamore.
    Cool Old Guy: He's an old guy, but won't hesitate to go out in the field and help you.
    Death Glare: Presumably what the menacing ellipses are meant to represent.
    Face of a Thug: In Pokémon Diamond and Pearl, when Johanna first mentions Professor Rowan after the incident at the lake, she mentions that she's heard he's quite intimidating.
    Genius Sweet Tooth: The fridge in his lab is filled with nothing but sweets. In the post-game, you can also meet him in Veilstone Department Store, where he complains about how they're sold out of RageCandyBars.
    
    Identical Grandson: Pokémon Legends: Arceus reveals that he has an ancestor named Kamado who looks very similar to him.
    The Mentor: X and Y reveals that he was one to Professor Sycamore.
    Only One Name: We don't get his first name.
    Retired Badass: Stated in the English localization to be sixty at the very least, yet can put up a good fight. It's also implied he was the Champion at one point since he can enter the Hall of Fame.
